Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Doctor Michael
Gervin. He's a professor in the Department of Anthropology
at the University of California, Santa Barbara. He's also
part of the Integrative Anthropological Sciences Unit and also
associate. Director of the evolutionary Anthropology and Biodemography Research
Group there and today we're going to talk about
his book Seven Decades How we evolved to Live
Longer and it's a very nice cover and nice
book. So Doctor Gervin, welcome back to the show.
It's always a pleasure to talk with you.
Yeah, thank you so much for having me on.
Uh, YOU know, I, I thought we last talked
a few years ago and then you tell me
it was 6 years ago, so I don't know,
time is flying by.
Yeah, I mean, 6 years ago, I also had
a completely different haircut, so, you know.
Hey, you still have hair, that's the important part.
Uh, OK, yeah, I, I guess so. I guess
so. OK, so, uh, to get into the topic,
because it's very interesting that last time, uh, I
asked, we have a long interview and I asked
you about your research, but we didn't touch, if
I remember correctly, on the topic of longevity. So
what got you interested in studying that?
Yeah, uh, I was trying to remember what we
actually did talk about. I think it was more
about social behavior and cooperation, um, and so, yeah,
you know, it's actually not that a distant, you
know, cry from, from thinking about cooperation just because,
you know, humans are so social, and one of
the ways we're even able to make it to,
you know, through childhood, much less to adulthood. IS
through, you know, interdependence, relying on other people. Um,
THERE'S so many different things that kind of, uh,
make you unable to, you know, get up and
walk, uh, that make you sick, that make you
not feel that great that day. And if we
didn't have other people to help take care of
us, um, we wouldn't make it. So this relationship
just between cooperation and thinking about health, aging, and
longevity. It was kind of a shoo-in, you know,
and it was always sort of in the back
of my mind starting some of the work in,
in Paraguay, but, uh, especially once I started doing
some work in Bolivia, uh, thinking about aging, thinking
about longevity, um, and yeah, that was basically what
kind of got me started over, was was like
maybe 25 years ago or so, yeah.
OK, so I imagine that if we were to
pick up a random person on the street and
ask them, OK, so who do you think studies
longevity? I guess that most people would say doctors,
probably. But I mean, you're an anthropologist, so how
do you study longevity as an anthropologist?
Yeah, good question. Um, And it also is why,
you know, I was trying to situate this even
with, with the book, right? There's, there's no shortage
of books out there on health, fitness, aging, uh,
you know, and many of them, you know, definitely
take different tacks than I do, like they're You
know, a kind of checklist of things you could
do to improve your life, to help live longer,
uh, and it helps having an MD to make
that, you know, more credible. Uh, AND then other
folks are, you know, the molecular biologists that are
sort of on the forefront to thinking about different,
you know, molecular pathways that, um, can be altered
in ways that can slow aging processes, and it's
like, yeah, what do I have to contribute? And
so, yeah, that's where I think what was interesting,
you know, I didn't really go into this thinking
like, you know, I'm a longevity researcher, but it
was just by, by kind of working, you know,
that, that stereotype joke about Uh, the drunk kind
of looking under the, the spotlight for their, for
their keys, yet, you know, their keys are on
the other side of the room, but you're just
looking where the spotlight is. And so I do
think that, you know, there's a lot of great
work out there on aging and longevity, uh, focused
on people just like you and me. Um, AND
so my approach was just like, well, if we
look To other populations, um, around the world, uh,
that haven't been really studied, uh, let alone just
the basic fact that, you know, the kinds of
populations I'm working with are the kinds of populations,
the kinds of environments, the kinds of lifestyles that
we've had up until just, you know, not too
long ago. Uh, CERTAINLY, there could be something learned
from all of that. And, and so that's been,
that's been my approach and, and, you know, it
started off with a couple. You know, obvious things,
right? Like, uh, it's easy to focus on disease,
perhaps than just thinking about aging and longevity a
little bit large. So just the very fact that
if we looked at people's hearts, if we looked
at their brains and focused on heart disease, focused
on diabetes, focused on Alzheimer's disease, uh, if we're
finding that certain populations around the world just don't
suffer from these diseases or suffer very minimally, That
has huge implications for thinking about aging and longevity,
uh, that we never would have known or thought
about if we hadn't really stepped outside of the
normal kind of biomedical circuit to the kinds of
populations that anthropologists, you know, this is more their,
their bread and butter. So I would say, you
know, as an anthropologist, what I had to contribute
was one, kind of looking and studying where most
people are not. Uh, BUT then also I think
taking as an evolutionary anthropologist in particular, taking a
broader perspective on uh the history of our species,
right? And so thinking about lifespan, longevity, and aging,
not so much from a, like a clinical perspective,
right, but from an evolutionary perspective where even just
the basic idea. Maximizing lifespan is not a goal
of evolution, natural selection, right? That, that, that, you
know, that's something that we want for ourselves, but
if we understand biology, then we can get a
different perspective. So yeah, that was also, I would
say something that I had to contribute that uh
many other folks involved in the aging lifespan arena
uh are not.
And how is old age defined? Because I think
that this question will be important for when later
we talked about how we actually evolved to live
around 70 years and why we have uh post
reproductive uh lifespan and all of that. So how
do you define old age?
Yeah, so I talked about this a little bit
in the book, right? Where certainly the people I
work with, you know, if they don't know their
age, and you don't have numbers beyond like 7,
then maybe you don't age, right? You just, if
you can't identify it, it doesn't happen. Um. But,
you know, of course, obviously that, you know, that
sounds silly to even suggest, but it's not, the
one aspect of it that might be true is,
it's hard to obsess over your age, like the
number, if, it's not, if it's just not something
that's salient in your, in your life. Like, no
one like looms with dread when they're approaching their
40th birthday or their 50th birthday or their 60th
cause they wouldn't really know that that particular milestone
is happening. And so I think, you know, people
around the world. Sort of defined old age, you
know, in a way that just seems a bit
more practical, right? Um. Something somewhat functional when you
can no longer do certain things that you're, you
know, used to doing, you can't see quite as
well as you used to, uh, you have trouble
moving around, um, you know, these are the ways
that people have, you know, defined kind of old
age in terms of, I think, functionality and, you
know, and I think that sort of underlies a
lot of the Cultural dialogue now about, you know,
you're only as old as you feel, that, uh,
you know, 40 is the new 30, 50 is
the new 40, where, you know, if, if we're
able to actually be in the, the kind of
shape at 50, that maybe we would have been,
you know, 100 years ago when we were 40.
Then yeah, in a, in a way, you have
kind of delayed aging a bit, and, and we
should think about it in, in those particular terms.
So yeah, so I, I kind of take a
more holistic kind of view about What is old
age. Um, NOW, certainly when you're doing studies, it's
hard to take that kind of holistic view and,
and for practical purposes, I still think it's instructive
to say, all right, amongst people aged 60 and
over or age 65 and over, you know, let's
look at their health or let's look at certain
characteristics and You know, whether or not a 60,
that even at age 65, some people are gonna
feel a lot younger are gonna be a lot
healthier than, than other folks, um, and that's part
of the thing that's just really interesting and exciting
to try to understand, you know, why, why does
the variability, it just increases with age, right? Everyone
age 20 is probably in reasonably decent shape regardless
of how much they're exercising or not. Uh, YOU
know, let alone, let's leave the Olympic athletes out
of that. But, you know, by 65, there's just
huge range of variability in people's health and condition.
Yeah, I guess that's an interesting point to make
here as well is that, uh, I mean, you
know, of course, much more about this than I
do, but uh there are at least some traditional
societies where people don't count time the way we
do, or, I mean, of course, they are aware
of the passage of time. But they possibly don't
even have the notion of a year, so I
mean, they, they don't know they are, or, or,
or, or they don't even care if they are
40 years old, 50 years old, 60 years old,
and, and I mean, of course, the point I'm
making here is not to say that because they
don't have the The same notions of time that
we have that they are uh uncivilized or something
like that because those are not really scientific terms
and uh but I mean they have a different
way of noticing the passage of time than we
do,
right? Yeah, and I think. Yeah, so aside from
how you're feeling in your own health and condition,
you can also think about just in terms of
life stage. So, you know, if you have children,
then, you know, maybe that puts you in a
different category, uh, and then certainly by the time
your children have children and you're a grandparent, it's
like, oh, now I feel old. But, you know,
again, that, that's relative because in a lot of
places, you know, if you're having your, your child,
your first child at age 18, then And your
children have their first children at 18, then by
the time you're still in your mid-30s, you know,
you're a grandparent, and by the time you're in
your 50s, you know, you're a great grandparent. So,
uh, again, you know, it, it's sort of relevant,
but it's not, it can't cleanly be defined old
age, you know, specifically, uh, as that.
And so what is life expectancy, because we use
this term a lot, but what actually is life
expectancy and what kinds of information can we get
from it?
Yeah, good. So I think. When people think about
lifespan, it's probably the most common thing to, to
come to mind that we think about the life
expectancy of a and life expectancy is of a
population, right, not really of a person. But we,
we, what we ascribe it to a person. So
if the life expectancy in the US, for example,
is like 78, then we do think that on
average a person born will live about 78 years.
So the expectancy part means it's, it's an average,
right? And that, and, and that's all it is.
It's so it's the average lifespan in a population,
um, but it's a bit deceptive, right, because Imagine,
imagine there's 100 people, and everyone born lives to
age 50. And so, the average there is the
same as everyone's lifespan, and so the average life
expectancy would be 50. And in that case, it
represents everyone in the population. But you can also
have a life expectancy of 50 where half the
people live to 100.5 the people, you know, die
right after they're born. And so the average there
is also gonna be 50 because half the people
live to 100.5 the people kind of died at
birth. But in that particular case, no one lived
to 50, right? They either died right after birth
or they lived 100 years. So this is where
a life expectancy sometimes Uh, can be quite distant
from the, the lived years of the majority of
people in the population. And so, you know, I
introduced this in the book because we're so used
to hearing that life expectancy in the past, and
life expectancy in groups like hunter-gatherers, you know, was
low. That, you know, it was in the, in
the 30s, sometimes even in the 20s, uh, and
on good, on a good day, maybe in the
40s, but what that doesn't mean, it doesn't refer
to that first example that everyone lived to their
30s and then they died, but it's more like
the second example that there's such a huge concentration
of deaths early in life, that first year of
life is the most dangerous. Uh, AND then even
to age 5, you know, over a quarter of
births of people born wouldn't make it to their
5th birthday. Uh, SOMETIMES that can be, you know,
even higher, like 30, 35%. So when you take
that into account, then it actually turns out on
the other side, there's lots of people making it
into adulthood and well into adulthood. So if you're
able to make it past that. That gauntlet, that
first, say, 15 years of life, so you're kind
of close to being an adult, then there's actually
a good chance that you make it to your
40s, 50s, 60s, and even into your 70s. And
so, you know, hence that's, you know, the, the
title of the book. Um, I'm glad you had
a copy with you. I had to look for
mine to find it. Um, BUT this idea that
We've lived to 7 decades in the past. And
that that's actually, uh, if you do look into
adulthood, the sort of average lifespan in adulthood. For
those who make it to adulthood is in that
kind of 6 to 7 decades range. I have
to always be careful now when I say that
because, uh, you know, uh, I did that and
my son was like, did you say 67 decades?
I don't know if it's in Portugal, but uh
Uh, I was in Malaysia a couple of months
ago and I heard people doing the 6/7 thing,
so it's global.
Yeah, yeah, I think so. Uh, I, I mean,
do you think that we should also clarify when
we talk about life expectancy, uh, whether we're talking
about life, life expectancy at birth or life expectancy
after people reach a particular age?
Yeah, I think, and that's a good, that's a
good question to ask. Uh, I, I recently, uh,
recently wrote an op ed about this, um, because
I do think sometimes when people think about like
the tech bros and wanting to live as long
as possible, they're not really talking about life expectancy,
they're thinking more like maximum lifespan or like amongst
the people who can make it to age 70,
how can we maximize the chance that we make
it to age 100 or 110? Whereas I think
if we're really interested in the, in the, the
greatest good for the greatest number, then life expectancy
is a good measure, right? Because it does reflect,
you know, if 1/3 of the population is not
making it to their 5th birthday, Then, yeah, that's
great for the people who are making it into
70s and 80s and 90s. But what about, you
know, all those lines that were cut tragically short.
So if we really want to maximize the lived
years in a population, Then the lowest hanging fruit
is actually all of those deaths in the 1st
7 decades, if not even the 1st 2 decades.
And especially, you know, it's not just in high-income
countries, but all over the world, uh, we could
do a lot better for improving survival within those
1st 7 decades, uh, and that would improve life
expectancy, probably more and definitely more per dollar spent.
Then trying to focus on making it from age
80 to age 110.
Right. Uh TELL us also about uh dependency ratio.
I mean, what is that and why is it
important?
Oh, Trying to remember the context in which I
talked about it. Probably when we think about, so
we've talked about aging of individual bodies, uh, but
when we think about population aging, then it's this
idea, well, as, as the population is getting older
and older. And so currently, for example, in the
United States, like 1 in 6 people is over
age 65 and we're frantic because, you know, just
within a couple of decades we're gonna, that's gonna
be like 1 in 5, if not even leaning
towards 1 in 4. And so as the, the
shape of the, the, like the population pyramid where
the bottom is like the youngest, and then the
oldest is at the top, you know, for the
longest time, it kind of looked like this. And
then over time, as we get older and older,
and we have fewer and fewer kids, the pyramid
starts to look like this. And, and so it
is a, it actually highlights two things. One, The
fact that we're getting older, living longer, meaning there's
more old people in the population. But it's also,
it's important that we're having fewer kids. Because if
it was just that we're living longer, the population
could still stay like this. Uh, IF we're still,
you know, having lots of kids, but when both
those things are going on at once, the, the
population pyramid starts to, you know, look very cylindrical
and sometimes even the reverse, it becomes top-heavy. We
have more, you know, uh, I forget the year,
but pretty soon we're approaching where we're gonna have
more people over age 65 than we might have,
you know, under, under age 5, for example, and
so. Uh, WHAT that means in terms of dependency
ratio is that it's usually defined as something like
how many dependents are there in a population, individuals
that need or require care, and typically you would
think, well, those are children, but it could also
be, you know, older adults. Uh, NOW this is
where it starts to matter if you're, if you
just use age 65 plus. But we're actually healthier
than we used to be, then maybe those people
aged 65 to 75, are they really dependent, or
are they not? So, you know, I talked about
this a little bit in the book that uh
It's not the best way of, of kind of
measuring it, uh, but it's the way it's often
done. Um, AND so if the dependency ratio is
high. Then that just suggests, OK, we have more
and more people to take care of. And so
there's the, the individuals that need care, and then
the individuals who are giving the care, the caregivers,
the producers. So we think about GDP and, and
productivity, and so it's uh, you know, how do
you make a society run, given that we all
come in all flavors of age and sex. And
so, with the basic idea that if too many
of us are in the dependent category, are things
sustainable? Who's gonna do all the caregiving? As it
is, if you have few people who are of,
you know, working ages, If those folks have to
take time off work to be caregivers, then that's
even, that's reducing the effective number of people out
there in the workforce even more. So this is
where dependency ratio becomes this sort of critical uh
turning point for thinking about like these societal issues
about aging.
Mhm. Uh, IN the book you also use this
term health span. Uh, WHAT does that mean?
Yeah, so. I mean, in some ways, health span
is just the sexier way of thinking about lifespan
that, you know, lifespan is just literally referring to
the number of years, whereas, you know, even now,
I think it's hard to find someone that is
just so committed to extending that number uh without
regard to the quality of those years, right? And
so the idea of health span would be like
sort of your lifespan of healthy years. So in
the best possible world, your health span equals your
lifespan. In other words, you're, you're healthy all your
life, and then as soon as things turn bad,
you die, right? Whereas in the other extreme, health
span is relatively short compared to lifespan. So it
might be great that you're living a long life,
but if you're spending a good number of those
years sort of unhealthy, then one, you yourself might
not be very happy. Uh, YOU might be suffering,
but also the toll it might take on the
healthcare system, the need for caregivers, you know, and
all, all the things that go along with that.
So yeah, this is why people talk about, you
know, they don't, they're not maximizing lifespan. They want
to maximize health span and reduce that lifespan, health
span gap.
Uh, IN traditional societies, is health span, uh, longer.
I mean, how much time do people spend in
older age, uh, dependent? I mean, how, how much
time do, do they depend on others before they
die?
You know, it's a great question and it's actually
never really been addressed and, and. You know, I've
been playing around with my next grant that I,
I'd like to write, uh. Just, you know, moving
beyond years and thinking about, you know, yes, different
ways of thinking about the quality of those years,
uh, health, physical health being one aspect of it,
but mental health, uh, certainly another, um, you know,
what does that look like at all ages, so
that you can, can you apply some of the,
the, the common metrics that are used to calculate,
um, health span like in high-income countries, can we
also do that in some of these traditional populations?
And it's never been done, you know, I think
people's guess about things is that, uh, the, the
gap between health span and lifespan is relatively short.
What I kind of suspect though is that it's
not that, you know, we tend to think of
it like health, the gap between health span and
lifespan is at the end of, at the end
of that health span. So that, you know, wow,
you, you, you live the 1st 65 years really
healthy, but then if life expectant, if life span
is like 75. Then from 65 to 75, those
are the unhealthy years. But I think in a
lot of traditional societies, those unhealthy years are really
distributed across the life course, right? That certainly when
infection is a major source of morbidity and mortality,
that's occurring at all ages. So it's not all
concentrated to the end, the end of life. But
in general, the idea that the, the, the, the
number of years spent with like elder care, you
know, would be relatively short in traditional societies. And
you know, that was one of the first questions
about You know, when we discovered that there wasn't
much heart disease, you know, the, the sort of
skeptic, internal skeptic was like, well, maybe there is
heart disease, but people just don't live long with
it, right? Again, that like life gets cut short
when morbidity presents itself. And so, so yeah, that
we need to study more to understand really what
does health span look like over that, over that
life course and And certainly as lifespan starts extending,
right? Cause even in a lot of traditional populations,
you know, things are changing in ways that are,
there's positive and negative. The positive is that lifespans
are longer, but what is that actually doing to
health span? Is health span moving in concert with
lifespan, or is it moving more slowly? And if
it's moving more slowly, that means we're adding more
unhealthy years than we are adding healthy years.
Um, WHAT can we learn from studying longevity record
breakers like super centenarians, and I mean, I know
that, of course, super centenarians, people who, who live
beyond. 100 years. Uh, I mean, it's a very
small number of people, and I also know that
perhaps there are some variables there that are very
hard to control like their habits, and I also
know that some of them, uh, appear to be
just Uh, lucky in terms of their genetics because
there have been cases of people who were super
centenarians and smoked and they have not really healthy
diets and and uh things like that. So, uh,
what can we, uh, learn from studying them, if
anything?
Yeah, so the, the. The pessimistic skeptic answer is,
uh, nothing. Right, because, you know, I think you
captured some elements there. Um, IT'S a very small
subset of the population, uh, and it's folks who,
you know, You know, lifespan, you know, certainly has
genetic, uh, underpinnings, uh, for the most part. Um,
AND as you get to those older, older ages,
uh, the genetic underpinnings are much stronger. So, you
know, making it beyond 100, you know, you have,
uh, you know, a, a healthy set of genes
that, you know, are affecting from DNA repair to,
you know, nutrient sensing in your cells to, you
know, cancer surveillance, you know, that you managed to
evade all the, the major killers. And, you know,
I do think it's instructive and interesting because they
are exceptions, right? Just, just like, you know, super
exceptional athletes, you know, certainly exceptional athletes have put
in their 10,000 hours, but, you know, uh, uh,
an excellent soccer goalie is not gonna be 5'4,
right? Uh, uh, AND so Prince was an amazing
musician but was never gonna be an amazing Uh,
basketball player, that's why the, the Dave Chappelle skit
of Prince playing basketball is a, is a classic.
Um, SO yeah, I think, uh, they're entertaining stories,
um, but you're right. Uh, THERE are a couple
of studies. Um, ONE was a study with Ashkenazi,
uh, Jews who lived beyond age 95, and comparing
them to, you know, Americans that didn't make it
that late, and You know, there's not any difference
really in their cigarette smoking, their alcohol consumption, their
diet, their physical activity. So they're not really doing
a whole lot different, but they're reacting very differently
to their, their environments, you know, and, but there
is another study that did show Uh, you know,
the chance of making it to as, as a
centenarian, you probably did have, you know, sustained healthier
habits. Um, BUT again, when I say we can
still learn something from that, but it's not something
that we don't kind of already know from many
other epidemiological studies, you know, that there's just, you
know, a handful of habits, you know, prevention, that
if, you know, if you are not a major,
you know, consumer of alcohol, you have a relatively,
you know, healthy diet, you're moving your body in
a physically active way, uh, you know, and To
the volume of, if you don't smoke, yeah, you
don't smoke, uh, stay away from, you know, heavy,
you know, opioids, uh, try to manage stress, just
those like 6 things alone will, you know, basically,
you know, really increase your chances of making it
to age 70, if not 80, 90, or 100.
And, and so we kind of know that without
even going to the people living beyond 100. Uh,
CERTAINLY I think it's just really amazing to talk
to those people just because think about the lives
that they've lived, you know, the experiences over such
a long haul of history, the things that they've
seen. Uh, I do think they're like our super
elders and, and so the same way that there's
a lot to learn from older people, I think
there's a lot we can learn from them, but
not necessarily, which I think is what you're asking.
Can we learn how to live to 100 from
talking to those people? Probably, absolutely not.
Yeah, I mean, because if you listen to some
of them, that French lady who still holds the
record for the longest lifespan, I mean, it was
122 years, and I don't know how many days,
but uh I mean, if you follow her advice,
the only thing she mentioned was that she ate
chocolate every day, she used a lot of olive
oil, and uh she never married. Yeah, yeah, I
mean, I'm not, I'm not sure if those are
the three secrets to reach 120 years of age.
I mean, it's the same thing, you know, you
wanna be, you look to, you know, people in
Hollywood or celebrities to, you know, what to wear
as if like that's gonna make us, you know,
turn us into celebrities and You know, you can
pick and choose the habits that you like. I
mean, Jean Carmon had a, had a great sense
of humor, right? I, I remember my favorite quote
from her, you know, I only have one wrinkle
and I'm sitting on it, you know, so cer
certainly, you know, that probably helped her get through
things. Um, uh, IT doesn't mean it's gonna work
for the rest of us. You know, comedians are
hilarious, uh, but I would guess that the average
comedian lifespan is significantly lower than the average lifespan
in the population, but
Yeah, it's, it's probably also not a good idea
to try to be a comedian out of a
comedy context, because, yeah, I mean, you might get
punched in the face.
Exactly, exactly, yeah.
Oh, OK, so, uh, you've already partly answered this
question before, but what can we learn from approaching
aging and lifespan from an evolutionary perspective?
Yeah, uh, I think that's a, that's a great
question and that we're. There's so many elements to
it, right, from just like the simple idea that,
you know, while our body is sort of a
well put together machine, you know, that it, it,
it's, it's not a machine, right? It's not designed,
you know, with blueprints, uh, from the outset. And
so, you know, the way it's sort of built
upon, you know, past forms. Uh, IT means there's
lots of imperfections, and there's lots of design features
that, you know, wouldn't be ideal if our goal
was to make it, you know, as long as
possible in, in a healthy way. Uh, JUST for
example, you know, lower back pain, uh, not only
is that one of the most common forms of
morbidity around the world, you know, in the small-scale
societies I've worked in, it's also one of the
number one complaints, lower back pain. Um, AND so,
You know, an evolutionary perspective, you know, sort of
aligns the fact that, yeah, we'd like to live
a long healthy life, but that's a means to
an end, right? And if the end is sort
of, you know, reproductive success, then once we start
thinking about, uh, You know, What are the impacts
of different body systems on the combined goals of
survival and reproductive success, you know, it changes a
little bit how we, how we think about design
and how we think about health. So the other
aspect too, like successful aging or healthy aging are
these popular concepts out there. That, you know, I
think are, are, are great for, you know, clinical
approach, like we wanna live long and we want
that to be healthy years. But again, we can't
just look to hunter-gatherers and say, well, what they
did must get us there because, you know, evolution
and all that stuff, like, no, uh, there's so
much misguided ideas about, you know, paleo this and
paleo that, um, That, you know, the very fact
that OK, groups like the Tsimane don't have heart
disease, don't have Alzheimer's, but they also You know,
rarely live into their 90s and beyond, right? And
they're more likely to die at every age of
life compared to your average European or American. And
so yeah, they're not getting heart disease, but they're
more likely to suffer from a common cold or
pneumonia than, than we are. And so, you know,
an evolutionary approach, I think, helps us think about
all the trade-offs involved and helps us think about
sort of the force of selection. So, it's kind
of zooming out, you know, the, the classic evolutionary
approach just takes it, you know, Are you, are
you producing babies? Right? And the force of selection,
you know, once you start reproducing, the force of
selection is declining to the point where if you're
no longer producing babies, then the force of selection,
you know, kind of goes to zero. And so
that means any gene that has harmful effects on
your health, but those harmful effects, you know, only
expressed in what's called the selection shadow, like after
menopause, then those genes over evolutionary time can accumulate.
And so you can get something like aging, and
that could be favored by natural selection because genes
that basically have those effects, a good number of
them probably also have beneficial effects on surviving earlier
in life and on fertility older, older in life.
And because surviving without fertility is an evolutionary dead
end. Evolution is always gonna favor genes that basically
lead to some fitness enhancing effect throughout life, even
if it comes at the cost of making you
more likely to die in the selection shadow. So,
just even that basic elements, I think have been
really instructive for thinking about Uh, aging and lifespan,
uh, across the tree of life, uh, certainly evolutionary
approaches. You know, we, if you just think about
humans, that's kind of limited. But just to know
out there, you know, each species is like a
different natural experiment and that, you know, Greenland sharks
can live several 100 years, you know, that's amazing,
right? Uh, THERE'S, you know, other species that, you
know, effectively can live thousands of years, like certain
trees. And so, certainly, you know, there might be
lessons to be learned, um, Uh, you know, to
date, just, you can't just take simple tree genes
and then, you know, plant them in humans and
have us live a long life. Uh, BUT, I
think we're getting more insight into the forces that
shape. Um, A typical lifespan and that shaped the
likelihood of being around for a long, uh, long
life. So, you know, we have a species typical
lifespan, and that, and that's kind of where, you
know, seven decades speaks a little bit closer to
what would have been more typical. Uh, LIFESPAN, so
a potential lifespan, not an average life lived or
anything like that, but how long you could live
under reasonably good conditions over most of our evolutionary
history. Uh, AND, and the one thing I'll say
then before I shut up, the good news there,
right, cause your listeners who are in their 70s
or 80s, they were like, what the hell am
I? Uh, IS that I think we've done better,
and that that typical lifespan now, uh, you know,
in 2025 is definitely closer to 8 or 9
decades. And so, you know, making it well into
adulthood, yeah, there's a really good chance that you
can make it into your 80s, uh, and even
into your 90s.
You, you know, you mentioned,
but not 150 is what I was gonna say
that we still, it's a variation on the theme,
but you're not doubling our lifespan.
Right. No, I was just going to say before
I ask you about another topic that at a
certain point you mentioned uh paleo approaches to health
there, and I mean, those kinds of things I
have to say really irritate me because whenever I
talk with anthropologists, what I learned is that They
never, what people say uh about that never makes
sense when it comes to diet, for example, I
mean, I've talked with several anthropologists on the show
study diet across different uh traditional societies and basically
the conclusion is that people eat whatever they have.
So in their environment, so, I mean, and if
you, if you are to look across all traditional
human traditional societies, I mean, you don't have one
single diet that everyone eats, right? I mean, so
it doesn't make sense to talk about a paleo
diet. Yeah,
that, that's exactly right, um, um, but, but even
if there was a single kind of diet. Just
because hunter-gatherers were eating that diet, again, hunter-gatherers though
weren't living as long as we would hope to
live. And so it might still be the case
that there's foods out there or combinations of nutrients
that if our goal was only to live longer,
could be, could do better, right? And that's not
even the case, right, because yes, hunter-gatherer diets are
fairly diverse, and yeah, people ate, you know, locally,
cause that's all there was. Um, YEAH, so, right,
it's, it's, it's quite ridiculous. Now there are some
commonalities though, certainly, you know, processed foods with lots
of kind of crazy unknown ingredients that doesn't exist
in any hunter-gatherer diet, uh, but it also doesn't
exist in, you know, most diets of just any
kind of traditional subsistence populations, herders, farmers, uh, and
even our own population, you know, a couple 100
years ago. So, so that would be kind of
a something right. But that, that's not usually what,
when people think about paleo, they're thinking about how
much meat, what kinds of meat, you know, should
I go full keto and uh eliminate carbs, I
shouldn't eat this, or seed oils and obsess over
all these things. Um, AND that part is a
bit ridiculous, yeah.
Yeah, also, because many of those people who propose
paleo diets exclude even for populations who have had
the past of being agricultural societies, they exclude things
like cereals and vegetables and milk, and I mean.
At this point, we know that at least societies
who have evolved um with agriculture that had uh
milk available and cereals and vegetables and all of
that. I mean, we have evolved adaptations, uh gastrointestinal
adaptations to process those types of foods as well.
That's right, yeah. In fact, you know, the pace
of genetic evolution, you know, accelerated with the growth
of populations in the last, you know, 10, 12,000
years, and a lot of those, you know, local
adaptations are, you know, related to diet, you know,
pathogens and diet, right, the two things that vary
a lot locally. So, you know, even if there
was a single diet that was the best, the
healthiest, like say a Mediterranean diet. Doesn't necessarily mean
that it's gonna be the healthiest for every possible
body around the globe. Uh, CERTAINLY it might be
better than one just filled with ultra-processed foods and
sugary sodas and things like that. Um, BUT yeah,
I still think there's, there's a, there's kind of
a lot to learn, and, and, you know, the,
well, I would say the biggest thing with diets
is just we generally eat too much. Right? So
regardless of the food, it's just the sheer quantity
of calories that we consume, you know, more than
anything else is probably res more responsible for our
obesity epidemic than, you know, the relative contributions of
carbs and protein and fats.
Mhm. So let me ask you, because when it
comes to waging, there are those people who say
that we should or argue that we should approach
aging as a disease itself because they then start
talking about how aging is associated with all kinds
of damage to the body. From genetic damage to
cellular damage to extracellular damage to other kinds of
damage that is cumulative and then that's what's also
associated with uh chronic diseases of different kinds. Uh,
BUT I mean, do you think that we should
approach aging aging itself as a disease?
Yeah, uh, also another good, yeah, good questions, um,
I mean, I interviewed, I interviewed Aubrey de Grey
a few months ago, so that's why I, that
came to my mind.
Interesting. OK, yeah, so. I mean, certainly, we're used
to fighting diseases, right? And so I think, you
know, if you wanna fight something, you call it
a disease, you know, it's, it's kind of one
approach, I think. You know, there, there's also a,
a legal aspect, at least in the United States,
where if you wanna sell drugs, then it has
to be, you know, in order to get FDA
approval, it has to be because it's uh helping
prevent or treat disease. And so otherwise then it
just becomes like a supplement and then kind of
gets grouped with all the new agey stuff that
you know maybe people won't take it seriously and
so there's that practical aspect to it um. The
thing that then gets wonky in thinking about a
disease is none of us are escaping aging, right?
That means we're all gonna get the disease. Right?
So is it really a disease if it's something
that everyone gets? I mean, in the past, you
know, Pregnancy was labeled a disease. Masturbation is a
disease. I mean, all these things that like Yeah.
Is it a disease of, OK, so, yeah, um.
So I don't think that it's super helpful to
think of aging uh as a disease, uh, other
than sort of as a rallying cry. Uh, um,
YOU know, certainly the, the whole kind of field
of geoscience is, you know, oriented around, well, rather
than dealing with sort of these symptoms of the
larger issue. Like, OK, if you, if you whack,
like playing whack a mole, right? You, you, you
can treat some of the heart disease, you can
treat some of the diabetes, but then something else
is gonna rear its ugly head, uh, if you
survive those things. And so this idea that let's
deal with the real disease, let's deal with aging,
and if you could slow aging, Then yeah, it
probably is the case that all the other diseases
of aging would probably, you know, become less common
or delayed as well. So I do think, but
I think we need to not put all of
our eggs in one basket or the other that
it's still, it's still the case that many of
us get, do get these diseases and for those
people, we do wanna treat colon cancer, right, especially
as that's something that's appearing younger and younger. Uh,
RIGHT now, in a lot of countries. Uh, SO,
yeah, that's real. We don't wanna wait for the
miracle of, you know, slowing aging generally and hoping
it's gonna affect those things. So I do think
we need, we need to still kind of keep
the one disease at a time approach, uh, while,
you know, there's other work going on that's also
funding for thinking about Uh, you know, aging processes,
the hallmarks of aging that, you know, you know,
in the hierarchy of things are connected to those
downstream diseases, but are somewhat distinct from it. But
because aging is something that affects like the entire
body, uh, yeah, it just It's so much more
difficult to think about and treat. I mean, we
have a hard enough time even just thinking about
Like, like cancer, right? We actually understand cancer, what
it is and what's going on in the body.
But that knowledge doesn't allow you to treat it
effectively, right? In fact, most of the advances with
cancer are really about, uh, early detection, uh, right?
So like, um, Pap smears for cervical cancer, um,
has gone done more to reduce cervical cancer than
any kind of treatment, uh, of cervical cancer per
se, uh, and then of course like HPV vaccines
again further prevention. You know, that's gone a long
way, um, but just the fact that, you know,
your cells go rogue, uh, and we know these
mutations occur and there's a whole set of cascading
processes, but that doesn't allow us the ability to
actually act on that and make a change in
our underlying biology in ways that eliminate cancer. So
if we can't do that with one disease, how
can we do that with aging that affects all
of our cells in our body. And, you know,
just quite practically, the, the, the successes that we've
seen in Drosophila, uh, and even in rodents, you
know, just so far don't really apply to humans.
Uh, SO, uh, these 70 years of, uh, lifespan,
um, I mean, these 70 years on average that
we live, I mean, if, of course, we exclude
the A high child mortality rate, at least in
more traditional societies. How have we evolved to live
around 70 years? I mean, why is it that
we don't have a shorter, a shorter lifespan or
a longer lifespan?
Oh yeah, another good question. Why, why not 80?
Why not? Or why not 40?
Uh, WHY
not
100?
Yeah, why not 100 and So they're definitely, you
know, one hypothesis, right, is, is. That You know,
the, the niche that humans inhabit. Uh, SO the
easiest comparison we can make sometimes is, is. You
know, to chimpanzees. So, chimpanzees are sort of our
best guess of what our common ancestor would have
been like, you know, in different aspects of the,
of their ecology, but also in terms of their
life history. Uh, AND so, you know, in chimpanzees,
you know, their life expectancy is a lot lower,
but their adult life expectancy is a lot lower
in particular. In fact, early in life, there's a
bit of overlap. Um, BUT, you know, no chimpanzee
is living really well into 7 decades. Uh, IN
the wild or under captivity, very, very, very few.
And so, uh, you know, 11 hypothesis is that,
you know, when we kind of shifted our lifestyle
towards a more hunting and gathering dependent one, that,
that this was something that kind of extended development
because it wasn't very easy. You weren't just picking
fruits off a tree. That were ripe, you know,
this was like learning a whole set of skills,
uh, you know, and it's not just like hunting,
but even like gathering roots, you can't even see
them, they're underground. So you need to know where
to look, what rocks to turn over, you know,
how to dig. Uh, AND so, you know, that,
that kind of learning. You know, we, we find
in, in studies that kind of measure at what
ages are, are people able to be effective hunter-gatherers
on their own, you know, that, that takes, well,
you know, up to about, you know, almost 2
decades, kind of like the equivalent of graduating hunter-gatherer
high school before people can start, you know, making
a living, you know, relatively on their own. And
certainly, but by that point, they've been so heavily
subsidized by others that they haven't really paid it
forward yet. And so this idea that, OK, so
we, we shifted a lifestyle of hunting and gathering,
where you basically created, you know, going back again
to dependence, right? The first, you know, almost two
decades of dependency. It would only really make sense
if you had a, a lengthy period in adulthood
where you were sort of net positive, where you're
basically reaping in these, these surpluses. And so that's
what we see in hunting and gathering societies, that
uh adults can be really, um, you know, bringing
in these bonanzas of, of food. And you see
that peak uh of production. Just calories brought in
per day, you know, well into the 30s, if
not even sometimes into the 40s, especially once you
add uh some farming, groups like the Chianes, you
know, that peak is more in the 40s than,
than in the 30s. So that, that alone sort
of like the whole life course, like in order
to kind of balance your, your accounting sheets. That
we would have delayed, uh, aging and, you know,
reduced mortality in ways that, uh, In ways that
um a hunting and gathering lifestyle became, became more
viable. In fact, the hunting and gathering lifestyle was
only really viable because we were able to increase
survival well into adulthood. And so, you now you
have multi-generational provisioning and cooperation, and that that Uh,
that's why I argue in the book that that
in many ways. You know, our longevity is not
sort of a consequence of our success as a
species, but it's one of the reasons that we've
been a successful species because of that ability to
kind of learn, uh, you know, the necessary skills
in your environment, um, and then to become really
effective, uh, producer in your environment. And then to
be kind of involved in multi-generational cooperation in ways
that not 1, not 2, even 3 generations. Uh,
ACTIVELY cooperating with divisions of labor, uh, allowed us
to really succeed. So Now I can't even remember
what the original question was. Was it about uh
Uh, I, I mean it, it was, it was
about basically how, uh, and how we evolved to,
uh, 7 decades, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah,
and so 7 decades. When you look at that
production that I was mentioning, uh, It doesn't last
forever, right? So you become good, but, you know,
as your physical prowess starts to decline, uh, and
even some of our cognitive, uh, uh, Maintenance is,
is compromised, you know, you start to see this
sort of coordination in the life course that at
the time when production is starting to decline. The,
the type of transfers that individuals are making. So
the flow of resources and services is also starting
to decline, and it's at a time when, you
know, survival is starting to decline, our health is
becoming more compromised, and all of that seems to
be occurring around 7 decades. So that was sort
of the coordination there. Uh, NOW you, you could
argue, well, all right, that makes sense as a
coordinated system, but why is that, why is that
coordinated system happening at 7 decades and not at
80? Why aren't there 70-year-old hunters that are really
effective and still producing? You know, that, that's a
kind of a more difficult question, right? Because then
it, it, it really You know, why aren't our
muscles, why isn't our VO2 max preserved to peak
at age 45 instead of age 25? There's so
many kind of coordinated systems and what I do
in the book is try to outline a framework
for thinking about these things, like, what would be
the marginal benefit on fitness if you could shift
VO2 max a little bit, so that now it
peaks at age 30 instead of age 25. You
know, maybe it is a benefit, but at what
cost does it come? And is that the best
allocation of limited resources in our body to make
it all happen. And so, even though we might
want that peak to be 8 decades instead of
7, it just doesn't seem to be that that's
what was worked out evolutionarily, uh, over time in,
in our particular species. So I will say that
there was a little bit of, it, there was
no back of the envelope calculation saying, look, 7
decades, it was starting off actually looking at lifespans
and hunter-gatherer populations uh that are around today, but
also even into the past and looking and saying,
huh, it seems to be the case that there's
this big kind of mountain of lifespans in adulthood
with the peak of that mountain at around 7
decades. How can we understand that in relation to
what everything we know about the human body. So
a little, a little bit working backwards. So, but
it does seem that there's a lot of coordination.
And even though we've done really well with ourselves
now, as I mentioned, 9 decades, uh, 8 or
9 decades, it's still the case though in that
period of 67 decades where, you know, heart disease,
you know, cancers, they're all increasing rapidly. Uh, SO
even our, although our ability to kind of withstand
those assaults is improved now compared to the past,
uh, there's still some inevitabilities that are kind of
built into our biology that haven't gone away. Uh,
THOSE things aren't being well delayed too much into
the future.
So in the more traditional societies, uh, we've already
talked about infant mortality, but how are lives cut
short? I mean, apart from infant mortality and particularly
in the, in the case of adults, uh, what
do they die from usually?
Yeah, uh, good question. And so, uh, uh, a
lot, pretty much almost everything except for, you know,
the major killers that we tend to see like
in, in the industrialized world, right? So not the
heart disease, uh, and not just because people aren't
living long enough to see that. I mean, some
of the studies we did on heart disease is
focused on people in the age ranges that would
have gotten heart disease, uh, in our populations. Um,
SO just like accidents, for example, are a lot,
are fairly common. So even in the absence of
cars, there's certainly a lots of accidental deaths, drownings,
you know, falls, fatal falls, you know, you're, you
wield a machete every day, and sometimes, you know,
you, you lop right into your, cut right into
your foot, um, and then your foot gets infected
and then we can die of secondary infections. Uh,
CERTAINLY kind of warfare-related deaths, especially on men, were
more common in the past than they are now.
And then for women, that kind of gets balanced
out in women with, uh, deaths related to childbirth.
So maternal mortality rates are way higher in subsistence-oriented
populations in the absence of healthcare, uh, partly they
have so many more children. Right, so the, the
average Thumane woman over her reproductive life has 9
births. So that's 9 chances, right, where, uh, there's
the possibility of, you know, potentially dying from childbirth-related
illness,
but there's a low probability that all 9 of
those children will reach adulthood, right?
Oh yeah, yeah, I mean, if all 9 kids
made it to adulthood, we would all be sane
by now, right? The, the, the, the growth rate.
Uh, WOULD be astronomical. Now, it is the case
though, the growth rate of groups of a lot
of indigenous groups living traditional lives, uh, is quite
high. So the Tsimane, it's, it's over 3.5% growth
rate, which is like a doubling time, you know,
under 20 years. Uh, WHEN I first started working
with the Tsimane, uh, you know, estimates were like
7, 8000. Chiane, and now the estimates are closer
to 18,000. So, uh, certainly the growth rate of
the population is higher now than it would have
been in the past. So, so even, you know,
when groups like the Tsimane live a much more
traditional lifestyle compared to how we live, but their
lives have changed a lot, right? I mean, 3%
growth would not have been sustainable, let alone the
fact that, you know, there'd be many more sane
around today than there are if, if that kind
of growth rate was going on for a long,
long period of time. Um, SO yeah, those are
the kinds of things, but, but largely, you know,
what we find is that about half the deaths
at almost all ages are due to one type
of infection or another. And, and this, you know,
we kind of know, right, in the big epidemiological
transition that hit uh high-income countries, you know, that
we made that shift, you know, we cleaned up
the water supply, we cleaned up trash off the
street, you know, we didn't have open sewers. Uh,
AND then after that, you know, antibiotics and medicine,
you know, we really were able to largely eliminate
lots of infection. Vaccines, you know, back when we
actually thought those were good things, you know, eliminated
so many infections, so much so that we kind
of forgot how harmful and deadly those infections are
until now, of course, they're starting to come back.
Uh, EVEN where I am in California, we're seeing
more measles and whooping cough, uh, cases than we've
ever seen before. Um, BUT yeah, largely eliminating lots
of infections was, you know, a huge boost to
life expectancy and years lived in, in around the
world. Uh, AND that doesn't exist in, in a
lot of small-scale traditional populations.
Uh, WHEN it comes to maternal mortality rate, I
mean that affects, uh, women a lot in traditional
societies, does it have to do primarily with the
fact that, um. I mean, our, uh, our brains,
our craniums, uh, it became, uh, very large in
our evolutionary history and the, uh, birth canals, uh,
didn't, uh, catch up, uh, fast enough. I mean,
does it have anything to do with that or
not?
I mean, it could, it could, um. You know,
it's, it's, I mean, there's You know, from, you
know, disrupted placentas to, you know. Uh, HIGH, you
know, gestational diabetes, um, You know, there's a lot
of different reasons why women sometimes die in and
around childbirth or, you know, months after childbirth. Uh.
Some of those could be related to, you know,
the big head that they're squeezing through their body.
Um, BUT even now, right? That, that Where there's
so many mothers that have C-sections, uh, in so
many ways that sort of prevented what might have
been, uh, fatal in childbirth, uh, for baby and
or and or mother, uh, but now that also
requires additional preventive measures, right, because you've just done
major surgery. And so that, that's ripe for infection
and, and, and there is a small percentage, right,
of women that, that suffer from sepsis after a
C-section surgery. And so, um, Yeah, I think, uh,
it's probably contributes to that, but it's not really
the, the, the sole reason for that. An infection
is still kind of a big kind of relevant
part there for, for maternal mortality.
And so why is it that we live past
our reproductive years? I mean, because it could just
be the case that, uh, once we can no
longer reproduce, we would just die. So why is
it that we have post reproductive lifespan?
Yeah, well, for most species, that is the case,
right? That, that, you know, the aging of your
muscular skeletal system, you know, tracks along with the
aging of your reproductive system. And that's kind of
what makes most sense from kind of a natural
selection perspective that as your ability to put genes
in the next generation starts declining, then everything in
your body starts declining. Uh, AND yeah, humans are
kind of one of those rare species that where
they seem to be separate. Uh, WE'RE not the
only species that where that occurs, but certainly one
of the, one of the fewest. And, you know,
and there's two things that could be going on.
One, you know, there's, you could have a long
life, but just extend. The age of menopause, right,
like, so they can still track, or if menopause
is sort of constrained, then your only thing you
can move is lifespan, and so you get this
post-reproductive lifespan. And so it does seem to be
that, you know, menopause is a bit and reproductive
senescence is more constrained than our ability to just
live. And so you see that bigger gap, um,
and that's where, that's another reason why the seven
decades is kind of an important. Discovery because, you
know, one idea was just that, well, we only
live well beyond 50. Let's say 50 at the
age of menopause, we only live well beyond 50
more in more recent human history, and so it's
not really an evolutionary puzzle why there's post-reproductive lifespan
if post-50 lifespan is recent. But no, the idea
is that even in hunter-gatherers, even in our past,
uh, women would have spent, you know, if they
made it into adulthood, a good chunk of their
adult life in a post-reproductive state, that this is
something that has existed long enough and it's costly
to achieve that. Natural selection should have something to
say about this. And that's where, you know, I
guess I would say, you know, the biggest contender
for thinking about the why of all of that
is that it must be the case that the
force of selection is not zero. So you're not.
Directly putting genes in the next generation by having
babies, but you're, you must be indirectly doing it
by, uh, improving your fitness in other ways, right?
Helping your children survive, helping your children find mates,
helping your children with their own children, so your
grandchildren, and so all the different things that, that.
Adults do, that could be impacting the fitness of
their relatives, uh, and of themselves, but in ways
that just don't involve directly having babies themselves. And
so that's sort of the big kind of contender
for, for thinking about post-reproductive lifespan. Um, AND why,
you know, the seven decades is we kind of
gets us back to your earlier question that grandmas
are great. Right, but a grandmother at age 60.
Might not be contributing to fitness in the same
way as a grandmother at age 85. Right. And
so there's a point at which those benefits of
having grandmother alive become a bit saturated, uh, relative
to the cost of keeping her alive. So, you
know, that in that balancing act, that's where I
think 7 decades sort of comes out, uh, uh,
a bit. That, you know, well beyond 7 decades,
uh, frailty settles in, and even the ability to
indirectly reproduce through all the different things that older
adults do, like, You know, helping Ken when they're,
when they're fighting and not getting along, you know,
helping kids, you know, instructing them in all the,
the ways of the local culture, uh, you know,
those benefits, you know, become small or even impossible
to confer relative to the, just the fact that
you're a physical body that still needs to eat
every day. And if you're mobile, that's even worse
because you need to be physically moved as the
group is moving, and that those costs become, you
know, heavy relative to the benefits, and somewhere in
that ballpark, I think 7 decades comes out.
Yeah, uh, I mean, there's the grandmother hypothesis, but
what about men? I mean, why is it that
we also have grandfathers, because it could just be
the case that grandmothers would do the bulk of
the work and who we wouldn't even need grandfathers,
yeah, right. Yeah, well, and that's where. You know,
the, the, the. I mean, we're, we're mammals and
we share a lot of our biology, uh, you
know, the developmental plan works out in certain ways,
you know, men have nipples, right, even though we're
not breastfeeding, and so, you know, one idea is
that, you know, let's just say that all the
fitness benefits accrue to one sex, but then the
other sex gets dragged along, right? So, you know,
one view of the world, it's all about grandmothers,
grandfathers are irrelevant. Granted, if they're, if they're surviving
longer because of shared biology with grandmothers, then maybe,
hey, they're gonna kick in and help out a
little bit too. Uh, YOU know, another idea is,
well, the benefits really are accruing to men because
they don't have menopause, so they could continue reproducing
until well past age 50. Uh, YOU know, it
actually turns out that, yeah, on average, you know,
men tend to be a few years older than
the women. That they're married to. So if people's,
if men's wives' fertility is declining, their fertility is
declining too, just offset by, by a few years.
And so even though men don't have physical menopause
though, they kind of have an effective menopause, just
delayed a little bit. Um, BUT there's been some
modeling done showing that, you know, the excess fertility
benefits men might get might be enough to offset
that declining force of selection, and in that case,
women will be dragged along. But I think, you
know, I just, kind of like there's no single
paleo diet. I feel like there's no single ecology
where uh it's all women or it's all men.
It's one of those things where uh to varying
degrees and in different currencies, men and women are
gonna be contributing uh to their fitness. And yeah,
in different places, it might vary a little bit
and maybe like in more gerontocratic. Hurting societies where
men have multiple wives, you know, maybe they are
some few men. Are reproducing well into their 70s,
uh, but even in those cases, you know, the
majority of men are not. Um, BUT on average,
there could be a net effect and maybe, and,
but then those men might not be doing a
lot of caregiving, but then the older women might
be doing a lot more caregiving. You know, we
just haven't really done the studies, you know, the
very few studies that have been done have been
mostly like food provisioning, because food is easy to,
it comes in every day when people come back
from, from hunting and gathering, uh, or from their
fields, and so it's easy to measure things, but
Uh, older adults are making contributions in so many
different ways. And so, just the same way where
we used to think like, oh, where men were
bringing in the bacon all the time, but we
were discounting all the ways that women were contributing
to production. And once you consider all those ways,
then it, it boosts women's productivity relative to men's.
Uh, AND I think it's a similar kind of
thing that, that men and women are both making
fitness contributions. Uh, I don't think they have to
be equal just because. You know, the moral dictates
of gender equality say it has to be that
way, uh, but I do, so I think it
will vary across, uh, populations and context, um, but
I don't think we should necessarily be thinking it's
all just grandmothers or all just grandfathers, and that's
an important point because The grandmothering hypothesis, I, you
know, I think it was a very influential and
helpful, but there's so many studies that have only
looked at the effects of grandmothers, and so we,
we can't even know in those societies what grandfathers
were even doing because it was assumed they're irrelevant,
so they weren't even studied. And so, yeah. Uh,
I guess my more gender neutral approach is that
we just need to see what older adults are
doing and all those, all those manifold ways that
they're indirectly contributing to their fitness if we really
want to understand something about kind of aging and
that balance between those fitness benefits of being alive
at later ages and the costs uh of being
alive.
Yeah, and I mean when it comes to fathers
and grandfathers, of course I'm, I don't want to
make too broad a statement here that might be
incorrect, uh, but uh at least in human societies
we have uh some degree of paternal and I
guess grand paternal. INVESTMENT, right? Of course I, I,
I'm sure it varies depending on uh the ecology
to what extent uh men, the fathers also invest
in their offspring and so on, but there's always
at least some degree of paternal investment, right.
Yeah, yeah, exactly, and, and, you know, and certainly.
And you've probably talked to other people. Well, if
you've had 1200 interviews, you know, I'm sure someone
was talking about paternity certainty, uh, and how that
kind of plays into, you know, paternal investment. And,
and again, that's just another part of the ecology
that, you know, if paternity certainty is lower, then
maybe men are making fewer investments and, and, you
know, investing more in mating effort. Uh, BUT on
the whole, you know, you do see plenty of
male investment in children, uh, and grandchildren around the
world.
Mhm. So, uh, OK, this is going to be
a, a darker question, I guess, but when, uh,
people, older people become too much of a burden,
a burden in, uh, traditional societies, how are they
dealt with? Because at a certain point in the
book you also talk about, for example, Geronticide. So,
I mean, what happens there?
Yeah. Yeah, you know, I was at a. A
mini workshop a few months ago on caregiving and,
and most people were there talking about caregiving of
infants and children and I gave a talk about
elder care and then, you know, geronticide as a
form of caregiving, so which probably was not what
what the organizers were expecting, uh. But there's a
little bit of truth to this idea, right? So,
Uh, certainly, throughout his our, our history, um, there's
a range of behaviors that, for lack of a
better term, have been called death hastening behaviors were
based, you know, on the extreme and could be
like murder, right? You kill an old person, um,
you know, and, on a more mild and it
could be like mild neglect, right? Maybe when, you
know, it's dinner time. Uh, THEY get the last
plate, you know, and they eat if there's a
lot, but if there's not a lot, maybe they,
they eat a little bit less. Uh, AND so.
And you can imagine that. When circumstances are harsher,
so in more nomadic hunting and gathering groups where
you have to move camp every couple of days,
uh, It's all else equal, a lot more difficult
to care for someone who's in a frail state.
And so, you know, almost always these, these cases
of death hastening. You know, are applied to what's
what's called like the old old or like the,
you know, very frail, uh, elders. Um, And And
it seems to be more common under those harsher
conditions. As soon as you have farming, and now
you have somewhat semi-permanent settlements and you're not moving
camp every other day, all of a sudden it
becomes a lot easier, uh, so, uh, even if
you go out to your field for the day,
you could leave Grandma at the house, and there's
a good chance she'll still be there. You can
leave a pot of food even for her. Uh,
AND, you know, assuming they're not being raided by
anyone, that, uh, you know, she would be, she
would be OK. Um, So it makes a big
difference, those kinds of things, uh, but I think
in many ways, you know, geronticide sounds kind of
exotic and harsh and terrible, but you know, we're,
you know, we're faced with the same kinds of
decisions now about euthanasia and people willfully wanting to
end their lives, you know, and there's certain legal
ramifications like is it a terminal illness, uh. And
it's a weird thing too, where certain uh ramific
uh stipulations that, you know, should be terminal, you
also can't be depressed, cause like that's, that's Which
is, uh, you know, if you have a terminal
illness that might depress you, but if you're so
depressed that you can't make a rational judgment, then,
then, you know, that goes into play. But it's
a similar kind of idea, these, these trade-offs, right?
It's not someone like cruelly murdering an old person
because they get joy out of it. It's, it's
in some ways it's, it's, well, it's ending potential
suffering because that older person just might be miserable.
Uh, THAT older person might also recognize that they,
you know, they feel like they're a burden, that
they can't make the same contributions they were making
before, and that doesn't make them happy. No one
wants to feel like they're a drain on their,
on their kin, and especially in the context, you
know, in the, in high fertility societies, you can
quite literally see that. You know, calories that are
going to feed you are calories that are being
taken away for growing children in a context again,
where a lot of children don't make it uh
throughout childhood and so every calorie helps. So in
those contexts, uh, The cases where there was sort
of like outright ran aside, these were sort of
like joint decisions that were made, you know, by
an elder and a close family member, and oftentimes
it's, it's the close family member that, you know,
deals the final blow. And so yeah it's, it's,
it's a different, it's not what people think when
they think about Toronto side uh what was that
that movie like once once you turn a certain
age, you know, you're pushed off a cliff. Uh,
BECAUSE that, again, that's not how it is, right?
There's no magic age. It's really about going to
your first question, what's old age, right? When you're
really frail and can no longer, especially what I
see in Bolivia, when it comes to the point
where you can't, you can't go to the bathroom
yourself, you can't dress yourself, you have a hard
time walking and getting around, uh, and there's not
maybe available caretakers, you know, this is when you
really see. Uh, KIND of neglect, uh, and sort
of an accelerated death, uh, still not really outright
Toronto side, but sometimes people even try to end
their own lives, uh, when circumstances become that bad.
Yeah, no, I also read a while ago that,
for example, among the Inuit, uh, there, the elder
people, I mean, some of them at least at
a certain point when they notice that they can
no longer, uh, follow the group, they just, uh,
stay behind and let themselves die in the cold
or something like that, so they, they make the
decision, the decision themselves.
Yeah, yeah, I think that's, that's, that's true, that
it's, it's sort of an active con they're active
contributors to that, to that decision. Um, YEAH, I
mean, I'm sure there's been some exceptions to that,
but it, it's always, I think, been in the
context of these, these sort of harsh but practical
kind of trade-offs, um, where, you know, it's really
hard to care for everyone at the same time.
I mean, sometimes, you know, the, the kind of
caretaking needs come in direct conflict. With trying to
make a living, right, especially when making a living
means leaving home and going out and about, uh,
for foraging. So, yeah, that's exactly right.
So when it comes to the sort of age-related
changes that we tend to see in modern industrialized
and post-industrial societies like changes in muscular strength and
endurance, changes in the immune system, uh, cognitive functions
like decision making, memory, and so on. Uh, IS
that, uh, something that we also tend to see
in traditional societies? Are those, are those same types
of changes occurring there?
Yes, yeah, they are, uh, you know, the ages,
you know, might vary a little bit, um, but
the, the, the shape of the relationships tend to
look fairly similar, um, so even though, you know,
groups like the Chiane and the Hadza are so
physically active every day. That doesn't mean that their
VO2 max or their muscular strength is staying high
and preserved well preserved all throughout life. You're seeing
sarcopenia or muscle wasting in those populations just like
you see, uh, in, in our population, uh, and.
You know, different aspects of heart health even. Um,
SO even though like Tsimane have healthy hearts, you
know, we've looked at their like ejection fraction and
uh other components of like VO2 max, and you
see declines in efficiency with age. Now, they're still
sort of in a very fairly healthy range, but
you're still seeing that decline with age. Um, And
so yeah, there's no, there's no real kind of
getting around all of those things, uh, you know,
osteoporosis, and so weakening of, you know, loss of
bone mineral, uh, all of that, we, you know,
we see in traditional populations. Um, So yeah, those
aspects are all, are all the same, you know,
and the same thing with the brain that, you
know, relative to other You know, like, whereas your
heart VO2 max might peak in your twenties, early
thirties, you know, certain cognitive functions show kind of
peaks in young adulthood and then decline thereafter, like
different things related to like your executive function, but
other aspects that reflect your cumulative knowledge show increases
throughout the life course. And you know that one
possibility, you know, I hypothesize in the book is
because we're, we inhabit such a brain-based ecology, right,
where there's so much knowledge and, you know, decision-making
involved with hunting and gathering lifestyle that it really
prioritizes, it puts the premium on brain-based capital, right,
that, you know, quite literally our babies and children.
ARE like have fat heads and tiny little bodies,
and all development is making that the body is
getting bigger relative to the head and then it's
like filling the head, but it, it, everything's been
going designed towards like prioritizing the brain and its
development. And, and so when we have it like
such a skills-intensive Kind of feeding, you know, ecology,
uh, there's a premium to sort of keep that
brain online and to keep it reasonably intact, uh,
for as long as possible. So that even when
our body, this is like getting into that framework
of like, OK, if we could, if we lost
10% of muscle mass, Uh, relative to say 10%
of brain mass, uh, and cognitive function, which one
would have a bigger impact on survival? Which one
would have a bigger impact? Maybe on food production
or something like that, you know, and, and because,
you know, the importance of our cognition is so
great, you know, I suspect that we could sacrifice
some of our physical capacity and still get by
pretty well as long as our brains are relatively
intact. And so it is, it does seem to
be the case that the brain aging aspect. IS
slower compared to other aspects of our physical aging,
and that seems true for, for all humans.
Yeah, and I mean, I, I was going to
say in terms of our orthopedic health, I mean
the, the, the health of our muscles, bones, etc.
um, I guess that uh In our more modern,
um, industrialized societies, we tend to have the issue
of people underusing their bodies. They don't move around
enough, but in the case of more traditional societies,
perhaps, and maybe in our own societies, we also
see that with athletes or at least professional athletes,
some of them. Uh, PERHAPS in more traditional societies,
they, uh, perhaps in some cases at least they
would have the, the opposite issue. Perhaps they overuse
their bodies or misuse them in some ways, right?
Yeah, yeah, so for example, we've done studies of
bone mineral density and, and Uh, it's true that,
that men in particular have higher bone mineral density,
you know, in traditional subsistence populations, you know, compared
to, say, the West where we're more sedentary, uh,
but it's not terribly different for women. So even
though women in subsistence societies are a lot more
physically active, uh, they also, if it's a natural
fertility population, Uh, or context, they're having a lot
of children and especially if those children are more
kind of closely spaced together, and that's sort of
having an impact on your bone mineral density that
kind of counterbalances the fact that they're more physically
active. So the net effect is actually that, uh,
an American woman aged, you know, 35, her bone
mineral density doesn't look terribly different than a Timane
woman age, age 35. Um, SO yeah, I mean,
that's, that's exactly right that, uh, There's, even though
we're, in some ways, we're healthier, but there's a
lot of ways for things to kind of go
wrong. And, and again, goes back to just basic
physical activity and sedentary activity too. You know, right
now, I'm sitting on a chair and I'm not
sitting in a way that like I'm not using
any core muscles right now to maintain my balance,
you know, and, you know, if I do that
enough, yeah, I do think I'll, I'll be more
prone to injury and um My bone mineral density
is probably gonna, you know, winnow away. Um, Yeah,
So, uh, earlier you were saying, for example, that
er when it comes to, uh, I think you
mentioned heart disease that we see uh lower rates
of heart disease in older people in traditional societies,
but are chronic diseases that are common in industrialized
societies like heart disease, diabetes, cancer, dementia, inevitable?
Yeah, well, that's, I, I think some of the,
the hopeful message of some of my work and
my colleagues' work, uh, that work with like more
subsistence-oriented populations is they don't seem to be inevitable,
uh, right, because the very fact that, um, Not
just one or two, you know, extraordinary athletic, health-conscious
people avoided heart disease, right? We have those people
in our society, uh, but kind of writ large,
the vast majority of the population, uh, didn't get
heart disease, uh, and they're much more likely to
die of something else. You know, that, that shows
that prevention really, you know, can be very critical,
uh, and that it's not inevitable. So, certain, and
that's, that's sort of been one of the things
that we've learned from a lot of this, of
this work, you know, it's not inevitable that your
blood pressure has to always increase with age. It's
not inevitable that testosterone declines rapidly with age. It's
not inevitable that, you know, your prostate is gonna
get larger with age. These are all things that
we've kind of found from different, from different studies.
Uh, IT'S not inevitable that, you know, you'll get
diabetes or Alzheimer's, um. And so That it does
suggest that there are possible things we could do,
uh, and maybe that gets us to that, that
last question about, you know, what can we do,
what can we learn, and obviously, we're not gonna,
we, we're not all gonna become hunt hunter-gatherers, right?
Not only is it not feasible, uh, it probably
isn't something that most of us would want, right?
A hunting and gathering life is very difficult life.
And so there's a reason why. You know, hunter-gatherers
don't exercise, right? Why would they, you know, they
don't, they move their body when they have to.
They move their body because if they don't move
their body, they're not gonna eat that day. And
so it makes sense that we sort of evolved
to conserve energy and that if you could drive
to the supermarket, you're gonna do so, uh, rather
than like just go out of your way to
walk and carry like 20 pounds of food. Uh,
YOU know, no one really does that unless it's
something they consciously put themselves towards, but it's almost
like fighting evolution because, you know, we've evolved in
ways to sort of conserve energy, to consume energy
when it's available, uh, to consume dense packets of
energy when it's available, you know, and to enjoy
the flavor of fatty, sugary foods and all that.
That would have been in limited supply. And so,
so much of what we have to do to
stay healthy in a land of abundance. I avoid
things and avoid things that sort of come somewhat
naturally to us. We have to fight our instincts,
uh. And that's what becomes really, really hard. And
you know, I think there's no easy solution to
that other than, you know, well, there's no easy
solution, you know, the, I think the solution has
to be, we have to shift the incentives, we
have to shift the structure of how our societies
are organized so that the easiest options are healthier
options, right? If, if, if you build housing in
relation to a livable situation. So everyone can kind
of walk to a market. That already makes a
huge difference, that, that everyone can walk and do
their food shopping as opposed to kind of needing
cars all the time. Um, YOU know, if you
make it such that You know, at, at eye
level, you know, the healthy foods in the market
compared to the unhealthy foods, you know, little things
like that, that can go a long way towards,
you know, nudging us towards healthier lifestyles, I think,
you know, can make, can make a big difference.
Yeah, I imagine that if uh hunter-gatherers came to
our industrialized societies and saw people at the gym
running on the treadmill and lifting weights, they would
be like, what the heck? What are you doing
with that?
Yeah, well, yeah, the very fact like what are
these torture machines? Uh, WHY do these exist? And
why are people doing this? Like, it's just, I
remember just for the longest time, like, at the
very least, why aren't these exercise machines like hooked
into the grid, at least generate the electricity that's
powering uh the gym. Uh, AND apparently, you know,
some gyms have started doing that. And uh you
can reduce your monthly fee because you're contribute, you're
helping keep the lights on. Uh, THAT at least
it makes sense. You can feel like you're being
productive in a way that you're actually helping, uh,
doing something rather than just like mindlessly doing this.
But, you know, uh, that's OK. Fine, we, we
need this because our lifestyle is such that, you
know, we tend to be more sedentary. But I
still think even like with the gym, you know,
so many people buy their gym memberships on December
31st, right? And then by January 2nd, you know,
they, they already like aren't really going and, and
apparently just buying the membership doesn't make you healthy.
You actually do have to go. Uh, BUT I
think even something as simple as like buying memberships
like in, in pairs, having a buddy to go
to the gym with makes a huge difference. Now
you've made it a social activity. And you're more
likely to go, you're more likely to have someone
make you go, uh, and you vice versa, and,
you know, maybe the hanging out and conversation becomes
primary and the working out is just secondary, you
know, again, another way of sort of nudging ourselves
to, to being healthier, even in the sort of
artificial way of relying on, on gyms. Mhm.
OK, so let me ask you this question. So,
do you think it's possible to say at least
on average, whether, uh, let's say a 65 year
old, because that's usually the age that uh medical
institutions, the WHO. Joe and so on used to
define uh old age. Um, DO we know if
a 65 year old person living in a traditional
society, a contemporary traditional society or a traditional society
from the past, uh, would be healthier than a
65 year old living in, in a contemporary industrialized
society or vice versa? Is it possible to say
that?
Yeah, that's sort of like the, the $10 million
dollar question, uh, and that also kind of motivated
a lot of my work early on, like, really
basic question, and, you know, 20-some years later, you
know, I, I, I do have a better answer
maybe than before, but it's not, it's certainly not
an easy answer because on, on certain aspects, Like
the ability to walk 8 miles and do work,
I do think we're probably maybe a little bit
less healthy than we would have been, um. Uh,
THAT being said, I do think our ability to
sort of withstand a variety of onslaughts, assaults in
our environment is better. And so our ability to
survive infection is better, a 65 year old in
our society now compared to say what probably would
have been the case in, in the past. And
so I think our, our reserve in, in a
way is, is better now than in the past.
And, and we, you know, The shorthand for that
is just that. The, the, so life expectancy, you
know, when, when you ask me that question, You
know, I don't know. It feels like 3 hours
ago or 20 minutes ago, um. What I told
you is life expectancy at birth, but you can
calculate a life expectancy at any age. So the
life expectancy is 65, you know, it could be,
it's how many years do you expect to live
if you've made it to 65, and just based
on that alone. Uh, THAT number is larger now
than it ever was before, right? So it might
be like 15 years or 20 years, but in
the past, that might have been like 5 years
or 8 years. So, Now, it's not just that
you're more likely to get struck by lightning in
the past compared to now, that it is probably
something about your health and well-being and your ability
to withstand different assaults and recover from infection and
all that stuff that is contributing to, you know,
a doubling of the life expectancy at age 65.
And so I, you know, I would argue that,
yeah, I think we are. Healthier on average from
what we, what we even take into account, you
know, our, you know, that we're more likely to
be obese, we're more likely to have diabetes, we're
more likely to have a variety of these chronic
diseases, but as a whole, I think for the
things that kind of matter in the most practical
way, we're doing, we're better off now than we
were in the past at age 65.
Do you think that in our contemporary industrialized societies
we are, we perhaps are exposed to some evolutionary
mismatches in the sense that for example we have
easy access to high caloric food, we have easy
access to sugary food, uh, salty food, we have,
uh, the way we tend to move around, I
mean, is not usually by food but using motor
vehicles. Uh, AND the, uh, the kinds of jobs
that we have, we tend to be sitting, uh,
most of the time. So do you think that
some of those things, uh, if we're, uh, approaching
aging and, uh, health from an evolutionary perspective are
evolutionary mismatches?
Yeah, I mean, I think that's kind of the,
the common framework for thinking about a lot of
the chronic diseases of aging, right? That, uh, and
for some of these like newer types of diseases
and morbidities, uh, that, you know, our genome didn't
evolve in the particular context in which we, we
live now. Um. But I think it's, it's uh,
it's usually not so straightforward, um, because, you know,
certainly if you're, if you're 75, And you have
arthritis and you have a hard time getting around.
Well, having a car that you can still drive
to get yourself to where you need to go
is still a benefit, right? And you know, of
course, over-reliance on cars to the point where your,
your body is never moving. I mean, that's where
certain things can be taken to, to an extreme.
So it's really how we kind of use some
of those technologies, uh. Rather than like the whole
environment is kind of thrown out of whack. Cause
certainly plenty of people still manage to move their
bodies, um, and get lots of physical activity, uh,
and not just because they kind of go to
the gym. In fact, in many ways, I think,
you know, city living. Uh, IS effective for lots
of reasons, but, you know, if nothing else, people
are moving around and walking, you know, it's not
as, you know, you can't find parking and it's
expensive. So, you know, you're using public transportation and
you're walking a lot. And so you're getting more
steps per day, uh, and, you know, the higher
physical activity that, you know, groups like, you know,
the Tsimane and Hadza get. You know, it's not
because they're running vigorous, you know, half marathons every
day, you know, it's a lot of light and
moderate activity that they're engaged in, which is a
hopeful message to us, right? Because that, I think
we can all handle light and moderate activity. We
all wouldn't want to run marathons. And so that's,
that's sort of attainable, you know, light and moderate
activity. And, you know, the, the epidemiological studies sort
of show this, that at any activity level, if
you're fairly sedentary. Improving and just walking a little
bit more, uh, makes a big difference. Um, IN
fact, it makes more of a difference if you're
inactive than if you're already really physically active and
you add a couple of 1000 steps. So, yeah,
I think those, those are hopeful messages for, for
us moving forward.
Uh, LET me ask you, uh, because this is
something that in psychology, I guess social psychology specifically,
people talk a lot about, uh, people, uh, talk
a lot about how in older age, there's, there's
that sort of late age. Contentment that older people
uh tend to be more content, tend to suffer
less from depression, for example, than the younger people
is late age contentment a human universal? I mean,
do we also see that in traditional societies?
Yeah, another good question that I think, uh. You
know, this, this is one of those cases where
I think In some ways, the mismatch works to
our advantage, not to our disadvantage. Most of the
time we hear about mismatch where something, it's cause
it's quite literally defined that way. Our health is
poor because our genome doesn't match the conditions under
which that genome evolved. Uh, BUT in this particular
case, you know, So studying late age, kind of
contentment, life satisfaction, happiness, well-being, you know, put all
this under the umbrella of well-being, and yeah, I
know the psychologists, they care about which terms are
used, you know, contentment is a little bit different
than your momentary happiness, uh, but still thinking about
well-being overall. Um On average, yeah, older people in
many places around the world, uh, tend to, you
know, coming off of a midlife kind of slump
that they become more content with age, right? And
you, you know, in some ways this might make
sense, right? Uh, YOU learn, maybe you become a
little bit less competitive, a little bit less ambitious.
Uh, YOU learn not to sweat the small things.
Um, MAYBE
you perhaps you don't care too much about people's
opinions anymore.
Oh, right, the fact that you don't care so
much, you know, your reputation is established already. You're
not jockeying for status. Um, YOU can focus on
the positive, a little bit less on the negative.
You gain perspective, you know, if you wanna call
it wisdom, you know, all these things are things
I think matter that. Can improve our outlook and
improve our well-being, uh, and what's remarkable about that
is that that's a if that's improving with age,
uh, that's happening at the same time that our
physical health is actually declining, yet healthy body, healthy
mind, uh, all else equal, being healthier makes you
happier. So in spite of, uh, suffering from more
physical ailments, we actually seem to get more content
with age. And even more so. If you also
consider what's happening with age, you know, kids are
fledging the nest, uh, you know, if you live
long enough, you know, you're gonna start seeing everyone
around you die. Uh, AND so again, these social
losses, you know, combined with your physical health decline,
yet in spite of all that, you've got improved
well-being. You know, so I think that's pretty remarkable,
and. Now, but it is a little bit variable
even in the West, sometimes well-being increases throughout life.
Sometimes you do see it sort of flatten out
in the 70s. And so I do think there,
there is a sort of trade-off. Shit is happening
that is not good in your life, and to
what extent is it offset by other things? And
this is the case where if you live under
a context where You have labor-saving technologies, you have
a car, you have, you, you know, you have
uh life insu or health insurance, you have disability
checks coming in. So, you know, there's a sort
of institutional buffering that allows you to still have
an income and still get by, uh. Then, you
know, maybe it's a net positive, and you can
be content. But in traditional context, even in the,
this is where it was, you know, to many,
I think surprising, cause we tend to think, well,
in small-scale societies, everyone's surrounded by family and it
takes a village and people are cooperative.
Yeah, the, the social aspect of our lives, we
tend to think that it's more taken care of
in traditional societies than in, uh, contemporary, uh, industrialized
societies. Yeah,
but you know, it might be a double-edged sword
is because you're, you are embedded in these networks,
you know, when I talked about, uh, You know,
the 85 year old grandmother compared to the sixty-five-year-old
grandmother. And if you feel like you're a burden,
now all of a sudden, you're a burden to
all these people in your network, uh, and that
doesn't feel good. And, and so I think, you
know, in what we found, uh, is just a
whole lot more variability in well-being at later ages.
Uh, SOMETIMES you see those improvements like you see
in the West. But more often than not, you
either see no relationship with age, or you see
the opposite, like things are getting worse with age.
Uh, AND I just think that that's maybe more
typical in a context where your physical health is
sort of Primary for making a living, for, for
being useful to others. Um, AND where there's no
cars to drive you around and no Ubers to,
to move your body from here to there. And
so that aspect of physicality becomes really critical, uh,
and that ability of being useful to others becomes
really critical. I mean, it's true in our society,
no one wants to think of themselves as a
burden. No one wants to feel that they're not
useful to other people. But maybe it becomes a
little bit less necessary here because you still can
have a viable livelihood. Uh, EVEN if you kind
of live alone. Um, SO yeah, I think, you
know, that aspect is a little bit more surprising,
both that one, in small-scale societies, everyone's not happy
at late ages, and if anything, those people might
be the most miserable at the latest ages.
Yeah, maybe we will find out that in industrialized
societies, at least, uh, people get more content in
older age because they actually do not fear death,
but they were living for so long. They're like,
oh my God, finally this is coming over. Finally,
I'm in the last 100 m of the marathon.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, I think so. I think so.
Well, we, we certainly have a, a big culture
that kind of focuses on these things and Uh,
yeah. Um, No, it's, it's a, it's a good
question, and I, and I do think it's sort
of what we need to understand better. Cause ultimately,
uh, we do wanna improve our survival and live
longer, but we wanna, we want a happy life.
We want a healthy life, we wanna be content.
Uh, AND if that's ultimately what matters most, well,
we should be studying that a lot more systematically
than we are just whether you're alive or dead
at a given age. So.
OK, so I have just uh two more questions
I want to ask you. Uh, LET'S talk a
little bit about retirement because of course we have
retirement in, um, contemporary industrialized societies, but what about
traditional societies? Is there such a thing as retirement
there and what are the effects of retirement in
for old people?
Yeah. So Short answer, no. There is no retirement.
Like no, no formal retirement like the way we
think of it. Like you reach a target age,
and then you no longer work. Um, THAT doesn't
exist. And so, so that's also, you know, a
bit of a mismatch. Um, AND even more so
a mismatch cause when, you know, 65, you know,
was placed as a, as an arbitrary age, at
least in the US. Uh, YOU know, that was
occurring at a time where that was already older
than our life expectancy. Right? And now that's well
below our life expectancy. And so, The, the question
about, you know, should we have formal retirement and
then secondarily, if, if so, at what age? You
know, these are kind of, these are gonna be
questions that are gonna be part of the national
conversation. If we are younger at 65 than we
used to be, then should we be retiring at
all at age 65? Maybe that should be 70,
75. And so, so those questions are gonna come
out, but I, and I, and especially I think.
Um, You know, in small scale traditional societies, even
though I said you're not formally retiring, it doesn't
mean that people are still doing the same things
until they die. Uh, THERE is a shift in
what people are doing, and so people will, will
still try to be useful and participate in a
lot of different activities, but they might not be
doing some of the really physically intensive ones. So
Timani men, for example, they're not really using axes
and chopping down really thick trees, you know, when
they're in their 70s. Uh, THEY still might chop
down little trees, and with a machete they might
still do a lot of clearing in their field,
but they're not doing sort of the heavy physical
labor, uh, and And they're not, and they're not
hunting as well, right? And not just their physical
strength declining, but if your ability to see and
particularly your ability to hear become compromised, then your
ability to be an effective hunter just kind of
goes out the window. So, so yeah, those things
are changing, but there's a lot of other ways
of being useful. That uh people find. Uh To
keep active and still be included, still participate, uh,
not just in the economy, but into the politics,
uh, and the social scene in small-scale society. So,
in other words, they're still relevant, whereas in our
society, because work is life, uh, oftentimes, once you're
retired, people actually get really depressed sometimes. Uh, THERE'S
a little spike in mortality. Uh, AFTER retirement because
people don't know what to do with themselves, um,
granted, that's not always the case, right? Some people
are thrilled once they retire, uh, and they can
do all the things that they held back, but
this idea that you retire and, and then all
of a sudden your life becomes one. Focused on
leisure that that didn't exist throughout, you know, our,
our history and, um, you know, and I think
that's part, you know, the last couple of chapters
in my book kind of focus on that aspect
that, you know, rethinking that because, you know, the
burden of population aging, you know, maybe that could
be flipped on its head to, you know, as
more of a An untapped potential, uh. But not
if everyone is just focused on their leisure. But
instead, they're kind of focused on, you know, how
can I still contribute? What are all the different
ways I can contribute, um, you know, That dependency
ratio and all those other aspects that are seen
as problems in an aging society, maybe those things
wouldn't be, it wouldn't exist in the same way.
Yeah, and I guess that at the same time
maybe we can also put things in perspective here,
right, because it's not, uh, we tend to think
as having an occupation or doing something useful in
our societies uh as being the same as having
a salaried job, but there are many people that
even if Even if they are retired, they're still
doing useful things and practical things. They're taking care
of their grandchildren, they're doing housework, and so on
and so forth. It's not just because you don't
have a salaried job that you can't be useful
in society.
Yeah, that's exactly right. Yeah, it's, it's all the,
you know, certainly in hunter-gatherer societies, you know. The
same way that we focus on income, you could
focus on calories, and those are just one. Aspect
of contribution and what really matters, right, or if
it's impacts on, you know, fitness and well-being, you
know, we, for our purposes, uh, yeah, money is
just one way of one way of being productive
and, and even better, right, if you, if you
can get Social Security, you could still have some
income coming in. With the ability to then either
generate more income from doing other services, uh, and
of course, just. All the other things that, that
older people could do as well that make contributions,
you know, one, you know, one difference though, what
you could say is, you know, making these vague,
these contributions to society or society is sort of
like this vague thing, you know, maybe community is
easier to think about, family is easier to think
about, uh, but we also have smaller families than
we ever had before, uh, and some of those
families that when we do have them, they tend
to live far away. Which makes it more difficult,
uh, but it doesn't mean that that urge to
sort of be seen as valuable, uh, and useful,
uh, it's still there. And, and yeah, money doesn't
have to be, you know, the language in which
one judges your utility. Uh, AND so even, you
know, people make contributions to their church, you know,
they, they volunteer in schools, um. There's so many
different ways to kind of feel useful and feel
like you're making a difference and, and in a
way that Not only does an older person feel
more accomplished and better about themselves and their own
well-being, and it motivates them to be healthier when
they feel their life has purpose, uh, but it's
usually improving someone else's life, right? If you're helping
at a school, you're building literacy, you're reducing, you
know, teenage delinquency and all that stuff. So this
is why it's been argued where if we can
improve the contributions and the ability for elders to
really contribute to the extent that they want to,
that it's a win-win for society. Uh, BUT our
society isn't really structured that way quite yet, right?
If you can no longer drive, uh, then you
can't get to where those schools are. If you
live in a rural area where there's no public
transportation. Then you don't have an ability to get
from where you live to where that need might
be. And so, again, this is the sort of
rethinking about how can we, uh Build upon the
untapped strengths of our elder population, uh, to help
contribute to, to society.
OK, so one last question then, and I guess
that over the course of our conversation, we've already
addressed this question in different ways, at least indirectly,
but Um, I mean, do you think that even
with our evolutionary mismatches, some of them negative, some
of them positive, as we talked about here, uh,
that, um, we as people who live in industrialized
societies can learn something from how, uh, people age
in more traditional societies that could, uh, that we
could apply ourselves.
Um, YEAH, I mean, I, I think. You know,
we touched upon this a little bit, right? We
can't become hunter-gatherers, uh, but then one of the
lessons is, you know, nor do we, I think
we even want to, uh, but There are certain
lessons, right, you know. From little to large, like.
Like on the physical activity front, right? That, that's
the one commonality to all small-scale subsistence populations. Uh,
PEOPLE are fairly physically active. We know that physical
activity in some ways is the best non-drug drug
that we can, that we have. Um, AND it's
free. Everyone can afford it. And it doesn't have
to involve gyms. It can be involved just, you
know, walking around, you know, your neighborhood. Um, AND
so, Being more physically active and in ways that
don't necessarily require athletic equipment, you know, I think,
uh, Is one big lesson and just. Trying to
incorporate it into your life as a lifestyle rather
than as an exercise activity. No one wants to,
a lot, well, I speak, maybe for myself, no
one likes, like, I'm gonna go exercise now. It's
like a chore, you know, versus, you know, I
have to go pick up my prescription or I
have to go uh to Trader Joe's and get,
get some food, so I'm gonna, I'm just gonna
walk there. And so I think that mentality is,
is important. Uh, I think there's other things about
It's easy to get caught on various, you know,
competitive treadmills and focused on minutia in ways that
just increase our stress. They increase our stress and
they also erode our sleep. So we don't really
sleep as well as we could, you know, we're
staring into screens, you know, and, and disrupted sleep,
you know, messes up your circadian rhythms, it messes
up your immune system, it messes up almost everything,
your vascular system, uh, whereas, you know, a lot
of hunter-gatherers, they're tired, they go to sleep, you
know, and, and so, I think again, there's kind
of very practical kind of lessons of just. Uh,
Trying to extract the positives of our technology in
our current environment while minimizing. Uh, THOSE harms. You
know, I, I do think one lesson about the
diverse types of diets that hunter-gatherers have had, uh,
maybe means don't, don't overstress about what you're eating
if you're, you know, at the level of like,
you know, there's a couple of rules of thumb,
more fiber, good. Zero fiber, bad, right? Uh, SO
like empty carbs, you know, Processed sugar, added sugar
as an ingredient and things, bad, you know, less
of that, you know, good. You know, as opposed
to like, does everything have to have a paleo
label of approval? Uh, AM I eating, you know,
the right this, that, and the other thing, you
know, to the extent that, you know, like Michael
Pollan's You know, advice if, if your grandmother wouldn't
recognize, you know, the ingredients, then, then maybe don't
go for that. Uh, BUT again, if nothing else,
also just eating less, uh, than you otherwise. Uh,
MIGHT, and, you know, one way I think of
maybe it helps doing that is, um, To the
extent that if we eat socially. And not while
we're like watching TV and mindlessly just kind of
shoveling food in, uh, you're probably less likely to
overeat. So, you know, that kind of, you know,
people wanna call that mindfulness, mindful eating, you know,
that can make a difference. But, you know, all
those are sort of like little lessons about how
we can sort of capture some of the healthy
aspects of hunter-gatherer lifestyles without being hunter-gatherers. You know,
I do think there's probably another set of lessons
that are a little bit harder to Incorporate, but.
You know, on the infectious side of things, you
know, most infections are bad, but certainly hunter-gatherer microbiome,
gut microbiome is a lot more diverse than our
more industrialized microbiome. Um, Hunter-gatherers have a richer, more
diverse set of pathogens that they've been exposed to.
Uh, AND one hypothesis is that their immune systems
are better regulated than ours, and so they're less
prone to autoimmune disease, uh, but also might be
less prone to other ways that our immune systems
can go awry. I mean, heart disease, in effect,
is. You know, partly due to the way our
immune systems, you know, attack our own, you know,
little tears in our arteries, right? The way that
Uh, inflammation is actively involved in part of that
whole atherosclerotic process. And, you know, maybe hunter-gatherer, uh,
immune systems aren't working in the same kind of
way that affects those systems, uh, in a harmful
way. And so, since our immune systems were designed
to sort of attack pathogens, uh, if our immune
systems are a bit awry, well, that suggests we
really need to work hard to Make sure that
our immune systems are better regulated. And one way
that can maybe occur is maybe not obsessing so
much with, you know, hygienic, super clean environments. Um.
You know, you know, the 5-second rule of food
has been on the floor for 5 seconds, you
know, I tend to have like a 5-minute rule
personally. Oh my God. Uh, HEY, but I'm healthy
so far, as far as I know. Um. Yeah,
so there's the little things. I mean, obviously, it's
a, it's a, it's a nice balance, right? You
don't wanna, you know, In fact, you know, expose
an infant, you know, needlessly to harm, but, you
know, at the same time, you don't want to
be so sheltered and protected that you don't build
those defenses. Uh, YOUR armies, uh, can go awry
if they're not well trained. And so even like.
Having your kids in daycare, uh, exposes them to
lots of childhood, other infections in ways that if
they're like kept at home and exclusively, you know,
that they might increase the, the likelihood of, of
having weird allergies or, you know, I mean food
allergies. I mean, who had, who had nasty, deathly,
you know, nut allergies, you know, 50 years ago.
I mean, Those are things that are much newer
uh now than, than the past, and we know
it has to do something with our immune systems.
And so that, that's still a work in progress
because you wanna be able to add, you know,
resilience, but you don't want to increase danger, right?
So, people shouldn't be out infecting themselves left and
right in the hopes that, you know, cause we
just don't know enough and immune systems are so
individualized that There's not a single magic bullet that
that works equally well for everybody. But I do
think we can be a little bit practical there,
like, you know, don't bombard your system with antibiotics
unless you really have to. Uh, YOU know, and
there's good rules of thumb about, you know, those
kinds of things. You treat an infection, uh, fever.
Well, if it's 104, you probably should treat that
fever. If it's 99 °F, you know, uh, wait
and see, you know, that's, that's almost nothing. So
I think there's a lot of those kinds of
lessons, uh, you know, hunter-gatherers are also intensely social.
I think, again, you know, some of these health
fitness circles, you know, a lot of dialogue is,
is on like what to do with our individual
bodies as, you know, individual agents making decisions, but,
you know, hunter-gatherers are so intensely social, you know,
that to the extent that, you know, our social
lives, a healthy social life, I think feel like.
It, it, it, it leads itself to lends itself
to just being motivated to eat healthy and to
move your body and to do all these things.
And, and yet that's not something you can easily
prescribe, like, you know, take two pills and, and
add two friends at the end of the day,
like, and, and so, We don't know how to
do that as well as, as all the other
things, and yet it's such a key aspect of
well-being that I think we do need to put
a lot more attention to, to our social lives.
And so, and that's something that hunter-gatherers do all
the time. Um, SO yeah, uh, I don't know.
That's a, a, a kind of laundry list of,
of things, the easy things, uh, I think that
we can implement in our lives to sort of
capture some of the healthier aspects of hunter-gatherer lives.
OK, so Doctor Gervin, one of the things that
I certainly implement is when I start to get
tired, I go to sleep and it's already 77
p.m. here in Portugal, and I'm a morning person,
so in a few minutes, my brain will start
to shut down slowly, so let's. Perhaps wrap up
our conversation here and the book is again Seven
Decades, How We Evolved to Live Longer. I'm leaving
a link to it in the description of the
interview and Doctor Gerven, apart from the book, where
can people find you and your work on the
internet?
Oh, Well, there aren't very many Gurvens out there
in the world. So even if you just put
Gurven, G U R V E N, you know,
you'll probably find my website. I post, you know,
all of our publications on there and gives you
a little bit more information about Me and the
work in my lab. Um, I think there's some
YouTube videos out there, probably some talks, uh, Yeah,
I think it's the easiest way. My email address
is on there if people want to get in
contact. Um, YEAH, the book can be found pretty
much. I hope anywhere you, you enjoy, uh, buying
books, um, should be available. So, yeah, thank you,
Ricardo. This was, this was a lot of fun.
In fact, I'm seeing now over 2 hours, so
it flew by, so that means it was good,
great questions. Uh, GREAT conversation and thank you.
No, thank you so much for doing this. It
was an immense pleasure. Hi guys, thank you for
watching this interview until the end. If you liked
it, please share it, leave a like and hit
the subscription button. The show is brought to you
by Enlights Learning and Development done differently. Check their
website at enlights.com and also please consider supporting the
show on Patreon or PayPal. I would also like
to give a huge thank you to my main
patrons and PayPal supporters, Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick
Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf, Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird,
Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis, Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip
Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark
Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor, Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis
Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran,
John Yardston, and Samuel Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John
Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran, David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo
Romain Roach, Diego Londono Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte
Blis Nico Barbaro, Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary
G. Alman, Semov, Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza,
Julian Price, Edward Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco
Bartolotti, Gabriel Pancortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim
Duffy, Sony Smith, and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson,
Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists,
Larry D. Lee Jr. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey,
then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul,
Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris
Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan,
Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per
Crawley, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR,
Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory
Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos
Necht. A special thanks to my producers Iar Webb,
Jim Frank Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon,
Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John
Carlomon Negro, Al Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan
Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you for all.